---
id: 2b5aa989-a076-4c7c-924b-41253b4e819d
published: false
template: bookshelf/single
blueprint: bookshelf
title: 'Death in the clouds'
reviewtitle: 'Agatha Christie’s greatest Poirot story?'
subtitle: 'Whether this book carries the greatest Poirot story ever or not, it does offer an old-style, hardcore detective novel that gives the reader all the pleasure they desire and more.'
book: 'Death in the clouds'
by: 'Agatha Christie'
images: images/death-in-the-clouds.jpg
alpha: D
publisher: 'Harper Collins'
year: 1935
rating: 5
date: 1595548800
draft: true
tags:
  - detective
  - crime
  - fiction
---
A quick look at [my bookshelf](/bookshelf/) will tell the reader that I review more non-fiction books than fiction; this is not because I read non-fiction more (perhaps it is even the other way round) but because I think works of fiction are incredibly subjective that reviewing them is ever so less desirable. Nevertheless, one occasionally comes across a particularly interesting work of fiction that one finds worthwhile writing about—especially one whose cover makes so bold a claim as ‘the greatest such-and-such’.

*Death in the clouds* was Mrs Christie’s twelfth Poirot book, so it is understandable that the claim to be the greatest one ever was made premature: thirty-five more Poirot stories would follow. Perhaps it was a marketing move by the publisher. Why I mention this claim so early on in this review is to get it out of the way; I will not myself suggest it is one way or another so that the reader can rest assured that no superlatives will be stuffed down their throat.

<div class="note">For the most authentic 1930’s experience while you read this wonderful whodunit, I strongly recommend grabbing a copy of the Poirot Facsimile Edition (reviewed here) from The Crime Club, an imprint of Harper Collins that is as old as the Poirot stories themselves. The paper, type and design will all take you back to this book’s original days in print.</div>

The set-up of *Death in the clouds* is that of a rather typical Agatha Christie novel, or at least the sort in which Mrs Christie has showed us her prowess time and again (see ‘And then there were none’, ‘Murder on the Orient Express’). In the *Prometheus*, a plane carrying ten passengers besides Hercule Poirot, the stewards and pilots, we have a well-defined enclosure in which a murder occurs and every one of the ten people on board seems to have their own motives for having committed it that unravels as the story progresses. Investigating are M. Poirot and Inspector Japp, characters that are all too familiar to veteran readers of Agatha Christie. But this time, as the murder weapon is found beneath Poirot’s own seat on the plane, could he be the killer himself?

Fast-paced,
