---
id: 43ecb3e7-6c84-4a26-ac3e-ab0356257830
published: false
blueprint: essay
template: essays/single
author: b5b32860-ebab-42d8-95fe-bff6933f0df6
title: 'The hijab row'
subtitle: 'The debate around the hijab in India is really about the metamorphosis of individualism into selfishness.'
images: images/hijab-row.png
credit: '<a href="https://www.behance.net/gallery/26738781/Democratic-Schools-Medium">Marina Muun</a>'
tags:
  - society
  - culture
date: 1646870400
---
We do not have the right to be selfish. This is why masks can be made mandatory in a country where clothing remains a personal choice. We have the right to a personal life. This is why nobody can rap out knuckles for sprawling on the couch but the cinema hall can ask you to take your feet off the seat in front of you. There is such a thing as individuality and there is also such a thing as the common good. In private life, the former may always triumph; but in public life, the common good prevails.

The common good is often recognised as the source of table manners and chivalry. But it is also, albeit less frequently, recognised as the source of public libraries, parks, roadways and—above all else—schools. There is a reason why, for example, homeschooling has given way to common, public schooling today (read my review of [Tara Westover’s *Educated*](/educated/) for an interesting discussion of this topic). This reason is the common good. It is where *you* ends and *we* begins. If one were to turn briefly to economic theory, the common good would be defined thusly: the common good is that which members of a community would not possess if they were each motivated only by their own self-interest[^1].

The hijab row in India's Karnataka state appears at first to be a question of the ‘right’ to religion. Framed in that way, most things quickly become permissible, including a frying pan for a hat a la *Pastafarianism*. But this is neither the only way of looking at it nor a unique way. Nor is this the actual question we need to discuss for the long term. The hijab is a euphemism for the individuality hypocritically prescribed by religion, and the question here really is about where individuality becomes a detriment to the common good.

## Wahhabism and the internet

The Ottoman Turks successfully fought the Wahhabis—a sect believing in an exclusionist, puritanical and radical flavour of Islam—and had driven them from the cities of Central Asia by the 1920s. Shortly thereafter, the arrival of the tribal leader Ibn Saud, who gave his name to present-day Saudi Arabia, gave Wahhabism a surge of popularity and much-needed monetary and political support. Wahhabism was soon back in vogue to the point where modern-day Turkey itself backs the ideology leaving almost no room for any signs of the forceful opposition their ancestors put up against Wahhabis.

One of the biggest impacts of Wahhabism on the modern world has been its reframing of outward Islamic identities as superior to all else. This was not always the case. Consider, for example, what Asra Nomani, the founder of the Muslim Reform Movement, wrote as recently as 2016—

> As mainstream Muslim women, we see the girl’s headscarf not as a signal of ‘choice,’ but as a symbol of a dangerous purity culture, obsessed with honor and virginity, that has divided Muslim communities in our own civil war, or *fitna*, since the Saudi and Iranian regimes promulgated puritanical interpretations of Sunni and Shia Islam, after the 1970s Saudi oil boom and the 1979 Iranian Revolution.
> 
> In the eight times the word hijab, or a derivative, appears in the Koran, it means a ‘barrier’ or ‘curtain,’ with spiritual, not sartorial, meaning.
> 
> Today, well-intentioned women are wearing headscarves in interfaith ‘solidarity.’ But, to us, they stand on the wrong side of a lethal war of ideas that sexually objectifies women as vessels for honor and temptation, absolving men of personal responsibility.

The second paragraph is particularly important, as is the last line: the hijab was apparently never intended as a proper piece of clothing and Islam has always been a religion that held men up far higher than was justifiable. That the hijab is not a prescribed garment at all is voiced with supportive facts [by others as well](http://www.irfi.org/articles/articles_351_400/quran_does_not_mandate_hijab.htm) including in a thesis published at [the foremost Sunni Islamic university](https://www.moroccoworldnews.com/2012/06/45564/hijab-is-not-an-islamic-duty-scholar).

When the Muslim Reform Movement was founded, [less than 50% the world](https://www.internetworldstats.com/emarketing.htm) used the internet. Today, over 70% do. There are fewer differences between when this article was written and now that can explain how the headdress went from a symbol of oppression to a symbol of expression. In the internet, the Wahhabi ideology found a new battleground in which to spread its wings and reframe the status quo. It also found a young, new, impressionable generation of muslims at the receiving end of its instructions as well as tremendous potential to apply social pressure on them.

If the question is whether the hijab somehow prevents women from doing things, the answer would certainly be a resounding ‘no’. And nearly every stance on the hijab talks about this: articles written at the same time as Ms Nomani’s talk favourably of the hijab as variously supportive, representative or serving as a reminder to be a good Muslim. Perhaps some may need those things and some see it that way, but all this does is address the impact of the hijab in one’s personal capacity. The question we are dealing with is the position of the hijab in a society where diametrically opposing rules exist; this is not about whether you can wear the hijab but about whether your individual desire to wear the hijab overrides the common good that calls for its removal.

## A French affair

France and some other European countries have a history—protected to this day—of opposing Islamic women’s head coverings. Their opposition is not in empty arguments but is due to be carved by law. Wahhabism has apparently not penetrated French society yet because they continue, [as recently as April 2021](https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2021/4/9/a-law-against-islam), to recognise the gender-biased origins of Islamic face coverings. Currently banned, France then intended to push ahead and make a law prohibiting ‘any conspicuous religious sign by minors and of any dress or clothing which would signify inferiority of women over men’ in the public space. By July that same year the so-called ‘anti-separatism’ bill against muslim extremism, which French lawmakers believed would disturb the country’s famously secular society, [was passed by the lower house](https://www.france24.com/en/live-news/20210723-france-s-lower-house-approves-separatism-law-to-battle-islamist-extremism). 

It is worth noting that while these speak mainly of the burqa, the hijab is included in the umbrella term ‘head coverings.’ This may be seen most inconspicuously by the ruling party [banning their own candidate](https://twitter.com/StanGuerini/status/1391829596102877189?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw%7Ctwcamp%5Etweetembed%7Ctwterm%5E1391829596102877189%7Ctwgr%5E%7Ctwcon%5Es1_&ref_url=https%3A%2F%2Ftime.com%2F6049226%2Ffrance-hijab-ban%2F) from contesting in the elections for wearing a hijab in a publicity poster.

This fight extends beyond France. Most of Europe has either nationally or locally banned head coverings.

Of all the laws talking about the hijab, though, the one of interest to us in the present context would be the ‘French law on secularity and conspicuous religious symbols in schools’ passed back in 2004[^2]. While this applies to all religions, including Sikh turbans and Christian rosaries and, of course, Islamic headgear, it is the latter that most often comes under the limelight given that Sikh turbans are often worn inconspicuously (as a result of this law), rosaries are kept subtle (also as a result of this law) but Islamic headgears continue to draw attention towards themselves (in bold affront to this law).

The primary difference between a country like France and one like India is that the former enforces laïcité, the idea secularism comes only from disallowing religious expression in public, while the latter believes that secularism comes from allowing all religious expression in public. Why then are schools of concern? Simply because, among other reasons we will examine presently, they are not fully public spaces.

## On school uniforms

The other part of the ongoing affair in India is the use of school uniforms. This is, of course, a worldwide practise with certain common intentions. First, schools are an environment where learning—and all that is conducive to it—take precedence. Second, schools are an equal environment where no child is to be separated from any other on any basis whatsoever. Third, school uniforms are intended to induce a sense of camaraderie through similarity not unlike those of sports teams around the world. Fourth, in a country as divided by caste and class as India, the uniform grounds students, stripping any sense of inferiority or superiority, and rightly draws the limelight away from apparel and accessory to—hopefully—education. 

There are lots of studies that prove, often inconclusively, all these ideas. But until we have proof otherwise, it is safe to assume that the simple common-sense approach to these rules will do no harm. After all, if helping individuality blossom is a concern, that is what schools do without tying individuality to clothing. Finally, if the question is about my personal stand on uniforms in schools, I would only go so far as to say I dislike uniforms (like nearly everyone else I suppose) but do see the reason behind enforcing it should a school choose to do so. In any case, I see no grounds to oppose a school on the basis of their decision to enforce uniformity.

The hijab row deals with the wearing of a piece of clothing that, unlike a watch or necklace or baseball cap, fundamentally alters the uniform. While I am completely unopposed to people wearing even a gorilla suit while walking out on the street, while inside a semi-public space such a school *whose entire point of existence is education* and where you chose to go to get educated, the governance of the school must override your individual desire to wear a headdress.

On a plane where Sikhs [can carry a *kirpan*](https://www.ndtv.com/india-news/sikhs-can-now-carry-kirpans-within-airports-centres-new-rules-2821816) (no longer than six inches besides the handle), or on the road where they can ride without a helmet, the only persons concerned are the individuals themselves. In a school, certain individual choices might disturb the harmony, its effect going well beyond a single individual. On a more practical note, there is within a headgear, one might argue, ample room for malpractice during examinations.

## Examining the petition

<div class="opacity-50">Since the Karnataka <a href="https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/karnataka/wearing-of-hijab-is-not-an-essential-practice-as-per-islamic-faith-karnataka-high-court/article65226798.ece">High Court decision to uphold the ban on hijab in schools</a> the petitioners have moved India’s Supreme Court. As a result, this section of this essay has been updated to reflect the most recent petition that is to be scheduled for discussion in the Supreme Court.</div>

The current (ides of March ’22) petition by a select group of female Muslim students in India’s Supreme Court [asks a few questions](https://www.livelaw.in/top-stories/hijab-ban-supreme-court-urgent-hearing-appeal-karnataka-high-court-judgement-muslim-dress-code-194289) with rather simple answers.

1. **Uniforms are not mandatory by law.** This is true, and this is also why not all schools have uniforms. However, schools are also not prohibited from enforcing uniforms, which is why choosing to go to a school that *does* mandate a uniform means you need to abide by that rule.
2. **The right to wear a hijab is a part of the right to conscience.** A cursory glance at [the official PDF of the Constitution of India](https://legislative.gov.in/sites/default/files/COI...pdf) shows that Article 25, which discusses the right to conscience, explicitly starts with the words ‘Subject to public order, morality and health and to the other provisions of this Part.’ For the benefit of those unwilling to wade through the constitution, below is a reproduction of Article 25 exact to the letter:
> <h1 style="margin-top:0rem">Art. 25</h1>
> 
> <h2 style="margin-top:-0.5rem;margin-bottom:1.5rem" class="preventWidows">Freedom of conscience and free profession, practice and propagation of religion.</h2>
> 
> (1) Subject to public order, morality and health and to the other provisions of this Part, all persons are equally entitled to freedom of conscience and the right freely to profess, practice and propagate religion.
> 
> (2) Nothing in this article shall affect the operation of any existing law or prevent the State from making any law—
> 
> (a) regulating or restricting any economic, financial, political or other secular activity which may be associated with religious practice;
> 
> (b) providing for social welfare and reform or the throwing open of Hindu religious institutions of a public character to all classes and sections of Hindus.
> 
> **Explanation I.**—The wearing and carrying of kirpans shall be deemed to be included in the profession of the Sikh religion.
> 
> **Explanation II.**—In sub-clause (b) of clause (2), the reference to Hindus shall be construed as including a reference to persons professing the Sikh, Jaina or Buddhist religion, and the reference to Hindu religious institutions shall be construed accordingly.

3. **The hijab is an essential Islamic practice.** Untrue, as has been answered previously in this essay.
4. **In other cases other religions are given leeway e.g. Sikhs with turbans exempted from wearing helmets.** True, but this is impertinent as has been answered previously in this essay.
5. **Right to privacy by Art. 21.** Irrelevant.
6. **Right to freedom of expression by Art. 19(1)(a).** Once again, while 19(1) provides freedom of expression, 19(2) places certain conditions on it, invoking, once again, the idea of public order. Below are the first two parts of the article in question, reproduced exactly as in the constitution.
> <h1 style="margin-top:0rem">Art. 19</h1>
> 
> <h2 style="margin-top:-0.5rem;margin-bottom:1.5rem" class="preventWidows">Protection of certain rights regarding freedom of speech, etc.</h2>
> 
> (1) All citizens shall have the right—
> 
> (a) to freedom of speech and expression;
> 
> (b) to assemble peaceably and without arms;
> 
> (c) to form associations or unions or co-operative societies;
> 
> (d) to move freely throughout the territory of India;
> 
> (e) to reside and settle in any part of the territory of India;[^3]
> 
> (g) to practise any profession, or to carry on any occupation, trade or business.
> 
> (2) Nothing in sub-clause (a) of clause (1) shall affect the operation of any existing law, or prevent the State from making any law, in so far as such law imposes reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the right conferred by the said sub-clause in the interests of the sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of the State, friendly relations with foreign States, public order, decency or morality, or in relation to contempt of court, defamation or incitement to an offence.

7. **The State failed to control hooliganism that threatened law and order on the ground.** This is absolutely true and the government must answer for it. There is no excuse for violence or indecency in debate.

## Seeking a common ground

There is quite simply no end to the ideas of ‘my right’ and ‘my identity’. These ideas survive insofar as they are not detrimental to others. Beyond reason, these are indistinguishable from ego. Everyone has certain inalienable rights but the single, qualifiable exception arises when others are unquestionably disturbed by one’s exploitation of said rights.

The idea that national security is threatened, for example, is laughable. It is also not qualifiable, quantifiable or irrefutable and therefore is a meaningless exception to individual rights. Likewise, the sovereignty of a State is rarely irrefutable and is therefore a flimsy exception to individual right. But in a semi-public space where there exists a single primary goal (education) and rules exist to help achieve said goal, they naturally outweigh any individual desires that disrupt harmony. In a public space, the petition would absolutely win; but in a school, it becomes unreasonable.

It is important, nay our responsibility, to strike a balance between our personal freedoms and the common cause of a group of which we are have willingly become an integral part. The subsequent enforcement of a common identity of tangible expressions of equality become central to a conducive learning environment. Promoting that in a school must take precedence over individual independence. If individual independence takes precedence unquestionably, where does it stop? What parent would hesitate to ask for wild exemptions for their child? Do *Madrassas* not have uniforms? Do the uniforms not include a cap for boys and headgear for girls? Do *Madrassas* allow exceptions to this uniformity? How then can a reasonable argument be made for the opposite everywhere else?

Perhaps a common ground may yet be reached. While the burqa within a school campus is out of the question and a typical headscarf is still a stretch, perhaps just a hair covering with an uncovered face is a respectable middle ground, like the turban or better yet the Islamic male headdress. The burqa buries the uniform and the hijab breaks uniformity but a hair covering may still allow for the uniform to supersede while also catering reasonably to individual religious inclinations.

I continue to be of the opinion that India’s approach to secularism can take a leaf from the French book of laïcité and restrict religion to homes and designated places of worship, not everywhere in public. As for the current debate, the vehemence with which opinionated children can fight so assiduously for a religious garb that they are willing to skip school points to severely misplaced priorities. Perhaps experimenting with not wearing the headdress at school will give them a much-needed new perspective and push them out of their echo chambers. Perhaps it will also give them greater inclination to wear their headdress everywhere else in public. Either way, only good can come of taking their eyes off their religion and gluing them to their books instead.

[^1]: Granted, for those better versed in economic theory than me, this definition would resemble the public good as opposed to the common good, but I have taken the liberty to toss such nuances as their differences outside the scope of this essay.

[^2]: If you think the name of this law is long, wait till you hear what they call it in French: ‘Loi no 2004-228 du 15 mars 2004 encadrant, en application du principe de laïcité, le port de signes ou de tenues manifestant une appartenance religieuse dans les écoles, collèges et lycées publics.’

[^3]: Art. 19(1)(f) was omitted in June 1979 to introduce economic equality. For the curious, it granted Indians the right to acquire, hold and dispose of property.