---
id: 0178b1d8-dcf8-4e19-b4f1-7898f460db09
published: false
blueprint: essay
title: 'Migrating from Nikon to Sony'
fulltitle: 'Migrating from Nikon to Sony'
cover_position: center
author: b5b32860-ebab-42d8-95fe-bff6933f0df6
recommended: false
updated_by: b5b32860-ebab-42d8-95fe-bff6933f0df6
updated_at: 1683309393
tags:
  - photography
  - travel
images: images/rni-films-img-f021fd86-aaa2-4eb6-837c-e17d2984d970.JPG
---
I have been a Nikon shooter ever since I held a dSLR. Growing up, dSLRs were the next big thing after SLRs because they brought all the conveniences of digital formats with the capabilities of SLRs. Although they could not quite capture the dynamic range of film (and some might argue they still cannot) they did well enough for many photographers to take them mainstream. They were also less expensive and made great tools for learning because—unlike film—shooting digitally did not cost you anything at all. It made photography accessible without reducing the art involved in photography.

## Nikon D600

My previous camera was the infamous Nikon D600. It was Nikon’s first foray into affordable full frames. This class of camera is different from your usual ‘affordable’ camera because (a) they are actually quite expensive when compared to cameras in general and (b) the entry-level full frame camera often provides control comparable to or more than advanced APS-C/DX bodies. In short, the D600 was what most would consider an advanced, extremely capable, class-leading dSLR. It was showered with praise soon after launch with many failing to recognise—or at least give enough importance to—what would later become the last nail in its coffin: [dust and oil spots](https://uncertainty.com/my-camera-mistake-nikon-d600/).

The D600 was swiftly replaced by the D610 and Nikon even offerred to repair, for free, any D600 bodies showing dust/oil spots on photographs despite cleaning its sensor. I missed both recall notices the company offerred. They subsequently stopped the replacement programme and the D600 was officially history. Except, that is, if you consider that I still had it—and still have it. I used the D600 with its oil spots, often chiding myself for obsessing over them, even calling them art through imperfection. But at some point those imperfections turned into obstacles in the way of my realising my vision through my lens. The dust and oil spots appearing without fail on every picture I ever made turned my works from imperfect art to sheer blemishes.

It seemed like I had given my lovely old dSLR enough of a chance. When I bought my D600 there were already mirrorless cameras in the market. I did not feel they had matured enough back then and I continue to feel my judgement was correct. Now, however, things have changed. The mirrorless camera line ups from Sony, Cannon and even Nikon (although the latter two are late to the party) are in every way capable of matching top-tier dSLRs. This evolution in camera technology was led by Sony, which explains why they have the most comprehensive lineup of mirrorless cameras today, and ones that offer enough value for our money too. So it made sense to switch to mirrorless with my next purchase.

## Sony Alpha 7IV

My options were the Sony Alpha series, the Fujifilm X-series[^1] and the Nikon Z-series. I was familiar with Nikon and the company had brought over their dSLR controls to their mirrorless range so there was always the promise of familiarity in the Z6II and Z7II that I was considering. I have always loved Fujifilm colours but that would hardly be enough to sell me on their cameras. On paper, however, their lineup looked every bit as good as, if not better than, the Sony and Nikon offerrings. Finally, the industry leader in Sony made promises they showed they could keep, considering their last several years’ work with mirrorless cameras.

After my experience with the D600 and how Nikon ended their exchange programme despite D600s not exactly becoming usable ever after[^2], and considering Fujifilm did not really have much of a market presence where I lived (except for consumer film rolls), making it hard to even lay my hands on a Fuji X camera to test it out, Sony seemed like the most viable option. But I would not buy a Sony just because it was the only brand remaining. I briefly tested the Z6II and Z7II with my usual camera dealership but fell in love with the Sony Alpha 7IV in the process.

What appealed to me were its build, design and ease of use. Even more so, I enjoyed shooting with the A7IV in an indescribable way. Picking up the camera, dialling in my settings, aiming and firing were all utterly fun. They were fun in a way I had forgotten photography could be and it was not just because of the novelty. I felt more in control of my camera, I felt more comfortable pulling it out because of its compact size and inconspicuous look (especially coming from my bulkier D600), and handling it just made it feel like an extension of myself more than I had felt with my Nikon. And the colour science was incredible; it felt like Nikon was no longer the undisputed king of this realm. The people who made sensors for Nikon had also cracked the code to making their colour science considerably better than Nikon’s[^3].

## Thoughts about the Sony A7IV

The following is a summmary of some of my thoughts about the Sony A7IV (for still photography) after several days of use—including a dusty safari across a national park, druves around the foothills of the Himalayas and more.

Moving from Nikon to Sony has been easier than I had anticipated. Sony does some things questionably—for instance the blank space on the left-hand side of the camera leading to overcrowding on the right—hand side[^4]—and it does other things remarkably like Nikon. I have never been a fan of Cannon systems so I will not discuss that company at all. My first observation, in short, was that switching to a Sony set-up is quite easy for Nikon shooters because of the familiarity.

Second, I keep pressing the top-left button on the rear panel because my D600 had its playback button there while the A7IV has a customisable button. I have made sure not to assign this to any destructive actions at least until I lose my Nikon muscle memory.

When I bought my D600 there were already a few cameras on the market that offerred WiFi transfer to smartphones. The D600 and a lot of ‘higher level’ cameras like it did not offer this feature back then, so losing it to gain said ‘higher level’ control over my camera made sense. Now that WiFi bridging is a pretty stable and functional capability of most interchangeable lens cameras (and Sony’s implementation on the A7IV through its Imaging Edge sofrqis great) I find it a boon while on the field. I can simply transfer over whatever I need to my iPhone and check around.

The sharp reader may be wondering at this point why I made the jump to mirrorrless when they too are known to attract sensor dust[^5]. My handling of my camera is responsible, and my D600 gathers oil spots where my A7IV never would. In short, my problem is that my D600 is more susceptible to dust and oil spots than pretty much any other camera currently on the market. The potentiality of dust spots did not feature in my considerations while narrowing my choices down to the Sony A7IV.

– Dial set-up is closer to Nikon than the likes of Canon, making switching systems easier
– Nikon’s left-hand dials are missing, which takes some getting used to, just like muscle memory
– I am late to the party but the WiFi transfer mode through Imaging Edge works smoothly
– I was weary of the oil and dust spots in my D600 and the Sony showed me some on day one but it was easily dealt with using the built-in ‘anti-dust’ function which vibrates the sensor noticably to rid it of any dust particles
– The EVF is new but a welcome change, not out of line with past technological progress in cameras
– Shot entire first day in JPG, could not figure out why; could also not figure out why the camera was not behaving like I expected it to, then noticed a mismatch between the exposure mode dial and the exposure mode shown on the display before figuring out that I had been seeing the wrong marker (still/video/S&Q dial)
– Cycling through the info panel in the gallery only moves one way (D-pad up) so you have to cycle through all screens to return to a previous one

[^1]: I briefly toyed with the idea of buying a Fujifilm GFX series medium format camera but dropped it because of the same reasons I dropped Fujifilm in the first place. The complexity, support and possibilities with the other companies coupled with Fujifilm’s lack of market presence where I live.

[^2]: Nikon should have kept their exchange programme open indefinitely.

[^3]: I understand this is subjective but it cannot be denied that Sony improved their colour science by leaps and bounds to the point where Nikon cannot simply be declared the best at it. Colour reproduction with Sony is better than if not comparable to that in Nikon cameras. Sony may not be king in everyone’s eyes, but Nikon is not either anymore.

[^4]: The left-hand side of the A7IV has nothing but the film plane indicator (or sensor plane indicator if you prefer). I understand that video is an integral part of the camera same as stills but to dedicate the entire top plate on the left-hand side for focus distance measurement is a bit much.

[^5]: Mirrorless cameras do attract sensor dust, often more than a dSLR would under similar circumstances. But I am always incredibly careful when switching lenses around in the field. Handling my A7IV just as I would handle my D600 left the A7IV with no dust or oil spots, and the D600 with the usual lot.