---
id: 58f61f2f-f6f3-40d4-827b-9225f14d6f04
published: false
blueprint: essay
title: 'Those who can’t do, teach?'
subtitle: 'George Bernard Shaw’s famous maxim is both forgettable and questionable. Its subsistence is a sad reflection of a society that has failed to show its teachers the respect they deserve.'
images: images/those-who-can-teach.jpg
cover_position: start
credit: 'Illustration by <a href="https://www.behance.net/gallery/85804407/illustrations-for-the-Teaching-Tolerance-magazine">Yulong Lli</a>.'
author: b5b32860-ebab-42d8-95fe-bff6933f0df6
recommended: true
updated_by: b5b32860-ebab-42d8-95fe-bff6933f0df6
updated_at: 1698655031
tags:
  - society
  - teaching
---
George Bernard Shaw was a teacher. In 1903 he published a set of aphorisms titled [‘Maxims for Revolutionists’](https://www.gutenberg.org/cache/epub/26107/pg26107.txt) which served as an appendix to his play *Man and Superman*. The play itself is about love, attraction and a man’s adherence to his anarchist philosophy in the face of it all. The revolutionist in the play’s leading man succumbs to the charms of a woman who offers him the ‘life force’ in Shaw’s philosophy-laden comedic play and the appendix *Maxims for Revolutionists* extends these philosophical ideas in the form of pithy statements.

Shaw examines various topics in this process including marriage (“Marriage is popular because it combines the maximum of temptation with the maximum of opportunity.”), liberty and equality (“Liberty means responsibility.  That is why most men dread it.”) and of course education, in which these are all the maxims the author proposes:

>***EDUCATION***
>
> When a man teaches something he does not know to somebody else who has
no aptitude for it, and gives him a certificate of proficiency, the
latter has completed the education of a gentleman.
>
> A fool's brain digests philosophy into folly, science into superstition,
and art into pedantry.  Hence University education.
>
> The best brought-up children are those who have seen their parents as
they are.  Hypocrisy is not the parent's first duty.
>
> The vilest abortionist is he who attempts to mould a child's character.
>
> At the University every great treatise is postponed until its author
attains impartial judgment and perfect knowledge.  If a horse could wait
as long for its shoes and would pay for them in advance, our blacksmiths
would all be college dons.
>
> He who can, does.  He who cannot, teaches.
>
> A learned man is an idler who kills time with study.  Beware of his
false knowledge: it is more dangerous than ignorance.
>
> Activity is the only road to knowledge.
>
> Every fool believes what his teachers tell him, and calls his credulity
science or morality as confidently as his father called it divine
revelation.
>
> No man fully capable of his own language ever masters another.
>
> No man can be a pure specialist without being in the strict sense an
idiot.
>
> Do not give your children moral and religious instruction unless you are
quite sure they will not take it too seriously.  Better be the mother of
Henri Quatre and Nell Gwynne than of Robespierre and Queen Mary Tudor.

Such is the context in which arguably the most famous line of the entire work was published. Although the pronoun is misquoted nowadays as ”those who...”, the original statement was ”He who can, does. He who cannot, teaches.”