---
id: 98cd7c2b-e18d-4d28-a31a-3da0370699df
published: false
blueprint: essay
title: 'A fortnight in the UK'
cover_position: end
author: b5b32860-ebab-42d8-95fe-bff6933f0df6
recommended: false
updated_by: b5b32860-ebab-42d8-95fe-bff6933f0df6
updated_at: 1687848129
subtitle: 'Reflections on a *blitzreise* across the tiny island nation.'
images: images/culloden-war-hut.jpg
tags:
  - personal
  - travel
---
It is not often that I take to writing personal essays but I felt this one would be worthwhile considering that it comes as a precursor to my move to the UK. In September this year I will probably be attending the University of Leeds, and it will be the onset of winter, a cultural shift, a shift in weather, and—I expect—a shift in lifestyle back to studenthood. This essay is therefore a personal note but is published in case there are others who might find its contents meaningful.

## Stop 1: Edinburgh

The thing about visiting another country is that the first place you choose to step out of the airport can colour your views quite strongly. If you ever get to pick between any of the cities mentioned in this essay, pick Edinburgh.

There is a charm in rustic life and a sense of possibility in urban life. But make things too rustic and the charm gives way to wanting; in the other direction the possibilities give way to bleakness. Edinburgh stirkes the balance—as does all of Scotland. Between Scotland, Wales and England (we did not have the fortune of visiting Northern Ireland), Scotland would undoubtedly be my pick to revisit and visit for longer.

Edinburgh is a layered town. It has excellent public transport facilities in Lothian busses and a wonderfully historic albeit heavily populated city centre. Its University is of course known to be top class. We did not spend a long time here but every minute of whatever time we did spend here was memorable.

## Stop 2: Inverness

Without a doubt my absolute favourite place in the UK are the Highlands. They are exactly as I had imagined them and if I settle in the UK, it will be around the Loch Ness. We went on a day-trip to Skye which was mesmerising (as one might expect) but the city of Inverness itself was pleasant.

Some might say this is a walking town, but that does not explain why hardly any form of public transport exists around here. Inverness can do with some of Edinburgh’s Lothian busses. That said, our visit to Culloden was probably what sealed the deal for us. There was history, civility, friendly locals and a general pleasantness around Inverness that makes it memorable.