---
id: 4791ea58-7e77-46cb-94e7-8cf808668467
published: false
blueprint: essay
title: 'Debunking the Kashmir Files monologue'
subtitle: 'A cringeworthy monologue rife with hollow claims underscores the final act of the infamous film known as ‘The Kashmir Files’.'
cover_position: center
author: b5b32860-ebab-42d8-95fe-bff6933f0df6
recommended: false
updated_by: b5b32860-ebab-42d8-95fe-bff6933f0df6
updated_at: 1691375829
tags:
  - films
  - society
images: images/pexels-sam-clickx-17328712.jpg
---
There is a genre of film not many people know of but, once described, can identify at least a couple of films they have watched that can be categorised as such. An **exploitation film** is a “type of cinema...that is designed to create a fast profit by referring to, or exploiting, contemporary cultural anxieties.” Furthermore, such films show, among other things, “violence in society, xenophobia, and fear of terrorism” while they “claim to warn viewers about the consequences of these problems, but in most cases their style, narrative, and inferences celebrate (or ‘exploit’) the problem as much as critiquing it.” These quoted excerpts are from the Oxford Bibliographies where you can [read more about the genre of exploitation films](https://www.oxfordbibliographies.com/display/document/obo-9780199791286/obo-9780199791286-0096.xml?rskey=tIdo3z&result=1&q=Exploitation+films#firstMatch).

Vivek Agnihotri’s *The Kashmir Files* is an exploitation film. It relies on the mind-numbing influence the ruling government of India has on the country’s media and the disgusting feeling that on-screen violence evokes to make you connect that violence to specific religions and political parties and feel similarly disgusted with them. In doing so it attempts to secure itself a place among popular Indian films and culture as a legitimate retelling of the Kashmir Insurgency of 1990. To make its point the film borrows freely, multiple times, from the third reich while being patient with violence and inattentive to its storytelling. Such films are critically poisonous to society especially if an audience unaware of critical thinking is introduced to them—as is the case with any sort of propaganda.

The monologue in question[^1] is delivered by the protagonist before a packed audience at his university as part of his college presidential campaign speech. There are several claims he makes and these are the claims in the order in which he makes them:

### Claim 1
## Meditation means research

This is false simply by definition. Just as sitting does not mean eating, so does meditation not mean research. Both are wonderful, legitimate means towards their respective intended ends but they are by no means synonymous.

Ask any meditator or researcher or, preferrably, someone who does both. Kashyapa and Shankaracharya may have both meditated at Kashmir. They may both also have conducted some research. But meditation and research are not the same thing. This is actually a simple argument and would have been reasonably strong had the film not claimed outright that meditation was synonymous with research, thereby giving religion a false scientific legitimacy.

### Claim 2
## Laugakshi was the first astronomer in the world

While it is true that Indians took to astronomy more than most civilisations, they were not the first to study astronomy with reliable correctness. Laugakshi lived around 1200 BCE while as far back as 4000 BCE exist cuneiform tablets detailing the Mesopotamians’ detailed calculations of the average day and the rising and setting of venus.

It is also a well-known fact that the Egyptians built the pyramids seemingly in tune with stellar positions, which would have required a considerable understanding of astronomy. Whatever the extent of scientific rigour may have been[^2] Indians were among the first to indulge in astronomy, not *the* first astronomers in the world.

### Claim 3
## Kashmir was where the best minds became ‘Pandits’

This is not so much a question of factual accuracy as is it is a case of linguistic mix-up. The film here is drawing a picture of false harmony between the word ‘Pandits’ used in the context of Kashmiri Pandits and the word *pandit* used in vernacular. The former refers to Kashmiri Brahmins and the word *pandit* can mean a pracitising priest, a scholar or an accomplished musician depending on the context. A Kashmiri Pandit need not be learned and a learned man may not be a Kashmiri Pandit.

That said, it is true that Kashmir was quite supportive of education historically. But they were not only supportive of Hindu education; Kashmir was also home to some of the leading madrassas of the time. Even when some historical figures are quoted the claim remains doubtful e.g. the monologue says, “Vishnu Sharma [researched on] Moral Sciences. Yes, he wrote the Panchatantra,” but not only do we not know if Vishnu Sharma wrote or set the Panchatantra in Kashmir, we also have no reliable evidence that an actual person by name Vishnu Sharma ever even existed[^3].

### Claim 4
## Bharatha wrote the *Natyashastra*, the fifth veda

There is a lot to unpack here. The protagonist specifically states, calling on Netflix and other streaming services as if to strike a better chord with viewers, that the ‘dramas’ that surround us all trace their roots to the *Natyashastra* which the sage Bharatha wrote in Kashmir.

First, there are some claims in Hindu tradition that Bharatha wrote the Natyashastra, which most likely stem from his being attributed the role of overseer of the performing arts central to Hindu worship. But there is no reliable scientific evidence to support this. It is not known who wrote the Natyashastra and it may have been Bharatha but it also might not have been him.

The term ‘fifth veda’ is thrown around pretty callously in Hindu texts, all of which were likely vying for a place among the four (actual) vedas. The Ramayana, the Mahabharatha, the Ayurveda and of course the Natyashastra [all claim at various points](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fifth_Veda#:~:text=But%2C%20since%20the%20Mahabharata%20itself,considered%20as%20the%20fifth%20Veda.) in their texts to be the ‘fifth veda’. The *Chandogyopanishad* specifically terms the *itihasa–purana* as the fifth veda, somewhat clearing up matters but the takeaway here remains that the title of ‘fifth veda’ is much coveted but its holder remains uncertain.

### Claim 5
## The Greeks called Kashmir the ‘cradle of civilisation’

This quite simply never happened. And there is no such thing as a single, ultimate, global cradle of civilisation. There is no source remotely that corroborates this claim either. I was able to trace this statement to a speech given not by the Greeks but by one Raj Nehru, the vice-chancellor of Vishwakarma Skill University, who [reportedly described it as such](https://www.dailyexcelsior.com/kashmir-was-cradle-of-civilization-innovation-from-time-immemorial-raj-nehru/)[^4]. Dr Nehru has been repeatedly and severally awarded by the governments of India and the state of Jammu & Kashmir, and the Prime Ministers Office as well as placed on several committees by these government institutions, including the UGC—[his views may be biased](https://web.archive.org/web/20220131093805/https://jcboseust.ac.in/assets/uploads/media/e4594a98724ca172a02c865961f8a385.pdf).

The term ‘cradle of civilisation’ itself is a legitimate one, which appears to give the claim in this film some legitimacy. This is a term that has seen use elsewhere. There are six regions on earth identified as the cradles of civilisation:  Mesopotamia, Ancient Egypt, Ancient India, Ancient China, Caral-Supe (Peru) and Olmec (Mexico). This is academic fact. The meaning of ‘cradle of civilisation’ is a civilisation that arose independently of other civilisations rather than being established by the expansion of an existing civilisation.

As for Ancient India, this name comes thanks to the [Indus Valley civilisation](https://www.myancientindia.com/indus-valley-civilization-history-map-facts/) which lies partly in modern-day Kashmir. But should Kashmir be called the ‘cradle of civilisation’? Absolutely not: most of the Indus Valley civilisation actually existed in modern-day Pakistan[^5].

### Claim 6
## The Buddhists came to Kashmir because all above claims were true

The protagonist argues that none of his claims were lies (but were somehow washed away from history textbooks) and to prove their truthfulness he asks, “If this is a lie then why did the Buddhists come to Kashmir?”

This is a weird position to take in a debate. It opens you up to incredible rebuttals. Buddhism became popular in Kashmir because of the Emperor Ashoka, probably the earliest monarch to patronise Buddhism and thereby fuel its spread across the Indian subcontinent. Ashoka’s capital was Pataliputra (now Patna), about 1,600km from the Kashmir Valley. This is less than a month’s walk in an era where walking long distances was commonplace (the protagonist himself states that Shankaracharya walked from Kerala to Kashmir, a distance 2.5 times as long). By horse carriage these places would have been about a week away. Ashoka’s kingdom, for context, was well over 3,000km across. An emperor’s belief system spreading throughout his kingdom should hardly come as a surprise. It is certainly not indicative of anything but royal patronage.

After the Third Buddhist Council the emperor even invited scholars from Kashmir to his capital while sending envoys much farther off to Gandhara in modern-day Afghanistan. Kashmir was actually closer to this boosted spread of Buddhism during Ashoka’s time and buddhism in Kashmir became an inevitability rather than a rare occurrence.

### Claim 7
## Convert, leave or die

This film plays on a chant that seemingly paints the distressful state of the Kashmir exodus. The words variously anglicised as *raliv, galiv, chaliv*, *raliv, galiv, saliv* and *raliv, tsaliv, galiv* was the supposed war cry from hardened Islamists calling on Kashmiri Hindus to “convert, leave or die”. A quick Google search for these words in any order, spelling or translation between 1 January 1985 and 1 January 2005 (five years before and 15 years after the insurgency, a fairly wide period to look through for reportage) shows exactly *zero* results. Every single mention of “raliv, galiv...” comes from after the release of this film.

At this point I want to take a break to reproduce an excerpt from *India Today* a national publication in India that [reported thusly on the Kashmiri hindus](https://www.indiatoday.in/magazine/special-report/story/19900331-kashmiri-hindus-flee-the-valley-creating-a-communal-crisis-813765-1990-03-30) in 1990:

> [Sohan Lal] returned home after two years. The neighbourhood mason, carpenter and shopkeeper - all Muslims - helped him start afresh. He became a teacher in the local school and lived with his family in a house which, over the years, expanded to 15 rooms.
>
> Last fortnight, Sohan Lal fled Kupawara ... There was no raid on his house. No killings. Not even a threat. But when after Shivratri, his relatives from Anantnag and Srinagar did not visit him as they had done every year, Sohan Lal panicked. He locked up his house, gave the keys and his cattle to a Muslim friend and departed with nine other families for a relief camp in Jammu. Says Sohan Lal: "There was no communal tension. It took us six days to leave everything because of fear. And we cried - my family and that of my Muslim friend."
>
> On his third day in Jammu, Sohan Lal ... was part of a 10,000-strong procession led by VHP acting President, Vishnu Hari Dalmia. As the protestors wound their way through the streets of Jammu, the sloganeering became distinctly communal. "Security for Hindus in Kashmir" and "Down with Pakistan" soon gave way to "Har-har Mahadev" and "Bharatvarsh main rehna hoga, Vande Mataram kehna hoga" (If you want to live in India, you have to chant Vande Mataram)...
>
> But Sohan Lal was just one among over 10,000 Hindu families which have left the valley - and whose insecurities organisations like the RSS and VHP are trying to exploit...
>
> Fleeing from the stranglehold of Muslim militants in the valley, many of the migrants have landed straight in the lap of Hindu fundamentalists. These groups choose to ignore the fact that many Muslims too have fled the valley because of crippling curfews and breakdown of the administration.
>
> In Delhi itself, dislocated Muslims from the valley can be seen hawking the famed Kashmiri shawls and carpets. But such facts do not fit in, with the Hindu fundamentalists' perception of the Kashmir problem. So at the refugee camps, they are spreading rumours that the militant movement is directed against non-Muslims; that militants are infiltrating camps to identify migrants.

Everyone was at fault to varying lengths: the government with its shoddy administration, the Hindu fundamentalists with their exploitation, and the militants with their ill desires. The migrants and locals—even educated teachers like Mr Lal mentioned in the article, had little to aid them to verify information passing through word of mouth in a time when information was not speeding through the internet.

We had a repeat of this in 2021. Some 300,000–400,000 migrants escaping penury from states like Bihar and Uttar Pradesh, who had migrated to Jammu & Kashmir in search of employment and better days, were scared back to their home state after 11 people (including pandits, sikhs and these non-Kashmiri migrants) were [shot dead by a militant group](https://www.economist.com/asia/2021/10/21/militants-are-targeting-hindu-and-sikh-civilians-in-kashmir).

### Claim 8
## There was a genocide

The danger with misusing the Kashmiri insurgency for propaganda is that it not only downplays the effects of militant action on non-pandits but also makes it look like a single community was wronged in the past. The militant problem is clear and present and does not hesitate to take its victims from any community. The danger with misusing the insurgency for propaganda is that it takes the focus away from a much-needed response against militants and parades Hindutva as an antidote.

The last time two extremist ideologues fought, noboy won.

And this film should know that well: it bends over backwards to recall the holocaust to compare with the Kashmiri insurgency and repeatedly calls it a genocide. So here is a primer on what a genocide actually is [according to the UN Genocide Convention](https://www.ohchr.org/en/instruments-mechanisms/instruments/convention-prevention-and-punishment-crime-genocide):

> ...acts committed with intent to destroy, in whole or in part, a national, ethnic, racial or religious group, as such:
>
> (a) Killing members of the group;
> (b) Causing serious bodily or mental harm to members of the group;
> (c) Deliberately inflicting on the group conditions of life calculated to bring about its physical destruction in whole or in part;
> (d) Imposing measures intended to prevent births within the group;
> (e) Forcibly transferring children of the group to another group.

No single national, ethnic, racial or religious group was targetted in Kashmir during 1989–1990, the years over which this film is set. Police and national records suggest 219 Kashmiri pandits and over 1,600 non-Pandits were killed. There was, however, hundreds as many who left the Kashmir Valley, resulting in an exodus. There was no genocide, there was an exodus.

### Claim 9
## The 1300s invasion of Kashmir

Specifically, the protagonist claims “Islamic Tyrants ... invaded Kashmir in the 1300s ... because they knew that Kashmir was the world's centre for knowledge. And the one who can control the knowledge can rule the world.”

In the 1300s Isabelle invaded England, Portugal won independence from Spain, Sweden conquered Denmark and Norway, and the Ottoman empire was founded. Europe was struck by the Bubonic plague and the Great Famine, making the West an unattractive place to march your army into. In addition, initial Islamic conquests failed to take Kashmir because one was cancelled by the sultan at Damascus who had more important matters to deal with and a few others failed because plain-dwelling Arabic armies could not manouevure the Kashmiris in the Himalayas. Mountaneous warfare always favours the mountain-dwellers just as desert warfare favours the nomads of the sand dunes. This is also precisely why we still lay our rightful claim to parts of the Himalays against, for example, Chinese aggression.

So how did the Islamists finally invade Kashmir? A cursory reading of any history textbook will tell you they never did in the real sense of the word. A rushed summary for our current purposes: a mongol chieftain invaded Kashmir from the Jhelum Valley in the norteast rather than from the Himalayan foothills to the West from where the Arabs had tried and failed. Kashmir could not contain the assault because nobody supported the then-rulers, the Loharas, thanks to their horrendous administration which had cost them the people’s faith. In loss the Lohara king fled Kashmir. Then a Ladakhi chieftain who had allied with the Loharas up to that point took advantage of the infighting and seized the throne. He then met a Sufi saint and, impressed, converted to Islam. This gave Islam royal patronage and the massess, now led by a ruler they trusted, also converted to Islam in his footsteps.

Obviously not everyone converted to Islam. Most did while others remained true to their existing faiths. Thereafter, however, Kashmir’s history is filled with muslim rulers attempting to set up monolithic Islamic societies and encouraging conversion while Hindus fought back—with the Brahmins fighting especially to retain their socioeconomic dominance—taking inspiration from such (possibly semi-fictional) historic notes as the *Rajatarangini*.

So it was not a Muslim invader who defeated and dethroned a Hindu Kashmiri emperor but a Ladakhi Buddhist cheif who took advantage of infighting amongst Kashmir’s leadership and the people’s lack of fain in them to seize power and happened to like Islam more than Buddhism and then convert as a result. The 1300s ‘invasion’ of Kashmir, a centre for knowledge, was an intellectual war if anything, not a bloody one. It was also a sign of anti-incumbancy in modern terms.

### Claim 10
## Shamsu’d–Din Muhammad Araki and the *Tohfatuíl-Ahbab*

This is how the protagonist introduces the book *Tohfatuíl-Ahbab* in his monologue in this film: “if you want the original manuscript, it is available in Research and Publications Department of Jammu and Kashmir State, under Accession Number 551.”

This looks like great research on the part of the filmmakers but digging deeper tells a different story. The *Tohfatuíl-Ahbab* was translated from Urdu to English in 2009 by Kashinath Pandit under the title ‘A muslim missionary in mediaeval (sic) Kashmir’ and published by the [Asian–Eurasian Human Rights Forum](https://uia.org/s/or/en/1100006044)[^6]. Two sheets into the book, the copyright page says this:

> This book is the English translation of a Farsi manuscript, Tohfatuíl-Ahbab, persumably written in AD 1640. A transcript copy of the manuscript exists in the Research and Publications Department of Jammu and Kashmir State under Accession Number 551.

Sounds familiar? This helpful clarification in the book is turned into a smart comment in the monologue, a vain attempt to add legitimacy to its myriad claims.

The remaining research also seems equally questionable. For instance, the protagonist claims “Araqi was an Islamic Tyrant who was a lot more dreadful than Hitler” while this book says (see p. 63):

> ...the auspicious steps of Amir Shamsuíd-Din Muhammad would bring cure to the sick, and true guidance to the people steeped in ignorance and those who had gone astray from the right path.
>
> ...the primary purpose of Arakiís visit to Kashmir was to procure herbs and medicines. His effort of propagating Islam of Nurbakhshiyyeh sect in Kashmir was only a by-product of the actual mission. The illusion is obviously to the valley of Kashmir as a stronghold of Hinduism.

The research gets worse. The film claims that, “They would cut their sacred Hindu thread, they were made to read the Kalma, the declaration of faith, they were circumcised and forced to eat beef.” Seemingly, a viewer may think this is also from the *Tohfatuíl-Ahbab* except it is not. It is from another book called *Baharistan-i-Shahi* (also translated by Kashinath Pandit) to which the film makes no reference and, had they done some research, the filmmakers would have realised that the *Tohfatuíl-Ahbab* itself mentions this in a footnote while describing an *Idgah* ground:

> The large ground in the proximity of downtown Safa Kadal in Srinaagr city. The author of Baharistan tells us that mass conversion and circumcision of the Hindus under instructions of Shamsuíd-Din Araki took place on the Idgah ground.

At this point things get interesting. The *other* work, also by Kashinath Pandit, as stated above, claims the following:

> It is recorded in Tohfat, that on the instance of Shamsu'd-Din'Iraqi Musa Raina had issued orders that everyday 1,500 to 2,000 infidels be brought to the doorstep of Mir Shamsu'd-Din by his followers. They would remove their sacred thread (zunnar), administer kelima to them, circumcise them and make them eat beef.

The film quotes this intact, but what is really happening here? The *Tohfatuíl-Ahbab* references that this claim is made in the *Baharistan-i-Shahi* and the *Baharistan-i-Shahi* references that this claim is made in the *Tohfatuíl-Ahbab* while **neither book claims this at all**.

In research we call this questionable practice [*circular referencing*](https://www.mediacollege.com/journalism/standards/circular-reference.html#:~:text=A%20circle%20is%20created%20with,using%20Bob%20as%20a%20source.). This is when two works cite each other to establish their own legitimacy without citing a third-party at all. It is also called bad research and is a favourite tool for propagandists.

What is the real story that is verifiable against facts then? Araki and his men *did* persecute ‘infidels’. But they did not stop at that. They also persecuted Muslims who refused to follow Araki’s Persian Shia beliefs. Araki’s story was not one against Kashmiri Hindus but another example of the Shia–Sunni divide that exists to this day. Recall from the previous point that in Kashmir Sunni Islam had royal patronage. Says Dean Accardi the Assistant Professor of History at Connecticut College, with specialisation in Kashmir’s medieval history, in [an interview with *Outlook*](https://www.outlookindia.com/national/medieval-tyrants-and-politicised-interpretations-news-191786/amp):

> ...if they remained obstinate **in their Sunni religiosity or Kashmiri culture**, he would treat them with condescending disgust or even respond violently. 
>
> With this attitude in mind, Araqi and his followers likely **viewed the non-Muslim Kashmiri community as the strongest representation of Kashmiri recalcitrance to his missionizing activities**—those most obstinately refusing to see the superiority of the Persianate Shia Nurbakhshi life and clinging to their traditional ways in defiance. 
>
> Thus, non-Muslim Kashmiris or Kashmiri Pandits were often those who took the brunt of Araqi and his followers' most violent actions. 

*(Emphases mine.)* Persecution took place but not as this film claims. As with all dangerous propaganda, the statements in this film’s monologue derive their claim to legitimacy by being remotely born of scattered truths.

## Other pithy claims

1. **Kashmir was the Silicon Valley of the first millenniuim.** Where do we start with this one? This is opinion based on uncorroborated facts and a blown-up, rosy-eyed view of Kashmir. There is no indiciation that Kashmir was at any point the pioneer in technology.
2. **Why did Nagasena and Ravigupta go to Kashmir?** This is another question that marks the protagonist’s weak debate around the idea that Buddhists mysteriously considered Kashmir special. Nagasena was a Brahim who converted to Buddhism. He never went to Kashmir; _he was from Kashmir._ Ravigupta is a name that appears multiple times in Buddhist literature and historic accounts of the region. It is unknown which Ravigupta the film refers to but whichever it was, [all Raviguptas from history mentioned in Buddhist literature](https://moscow.sci-hub.ru/4842/c83eb2b2a60fbe128cb8a5ee7ad3e2bc/10.2307@41694234.pdf?download=true) were born in the Himalayas. Going to Kashmir would not have been an out-of-this-world adventure for them.
3. **Araki killed 1,500–2,000 infidels daily as against Hitler’s 1,000 jews.** Death is not a numbers game as this film wants viewers to believe. These are individual lives we are talking about. However, if we did indulge the film, it claims Hitler had 1,000 jews shot daily just to contrast that with its claim that Araki had 1,500–2,000 infidels killed. The film pulls both these numbers effectively out of thin air: in fact, at the height of the holocaust, it is believed that around 14,000 jews were killed daily [per biomathematician Lewi Stone](https://www.latimes.com/science/sciencenow/la-sci-sn-nazi-holocaust-efficiency-20190103-story.html).
4. **If we haven't read about it, it's not a part of our history. If we haven't seen it, it hasn't happened. So, there was no real genocide in Kashmir.** I have been patient so far but this is just dumb. Nobody claims not reading about it discards facts from history. Nobody claims not witnessing something first hand as evidence of absence. And nobody makes the logical skip from these falacies to make further claims either.
5. **Cultural genocide.** Asks the protagonist, “Isn't destroying Indian Architecture, Indian Heritage Centers, Indian Spiritual Centers a cultural genocide?” The word genocide comes from the Greek *genos* meaning ‘race’ and the English suffix *–cide* meaning ‘killing of’, so cultural genocide is not a thing. It is simply a rabid attempt on the part of the film to exploit people’s emotions by finding an excuse to use the word ‘genocide’ again. The same goes for the film’s use, moments later, of the term “administrative genocide”.

There is one line someone in the audience shouts towards the end of this monologue that found me at last in complete agreement with something the film was saying. These words are, and I quote them verbatim, “Stop this rhetoric, talk facts or shut up.” That is good advice from Vivek Agnihotri. He should try to follow his own advice sometime.

[^1]: The entire film script, translated to english, [is available online](https://subslikescript.com/movie/The_Kashmir_Files-10811166). I used this to pick apart the monologue but can attest to its being in line with the film as I only watched the film a day or so before sitting down to write this essay.

[^2]: All the examples stated here—from Mesopotamia to Ancient Egypt to India—would likely not qualify as proper science by today’s scientific standards. Such an expectation would be unfair in a historic perspective and, if considered, would place India further below in chronological order of the pioneers of modern astronomy.

[^3]: A person called Vishnu Sharma is named at the start of the Panchatantra but the name could be a pseudonym or a reference to a compiler as opposed to an original author. Wikipedia lists these claims [with reliable evidence](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vishnu_Sharma#CITEREFOlivelle1997) attached as on the date of publishing this essay so I will refrain from reproducing them here.

[^4]: Two things to note here: first, Dr Nehru never claimed that the Greeks called Kashmir the ‘cradle of civilisation’, rather it was his own claim; second, the actual speech Dr Nehru gave is unavailable and we rely here on reportage from the a publication called *The Daily Excelsior*.

[^5]: For instance, both Harappa and Mohenjodaro, the two key sites of what remains of the Indus Valley civilisation, are in modern-day Pakistan.

[^6]: A [full text PDF](https://ikashmir.net/knpandita/doc/Tohfatul-Ahbab.pdf) of this has been made available by the Kashmiri Pandit Network. Obtaining books illegally is not condoned by this website or its owner.

[^7]: Like the *Tohfatuíl-Ahbab* the *Baharistan-i-Shahi* is also available from the Kashmiri Network as [a full text PDF](https://ikashmir.net/baharistan/doc/baharistan.pdf). Obtaining books illegally is not condoned by this website or its owner.