---
id: 53632bc3-1d6e-452d-82f6-46dc910875e7
published: false
blueprint: essay
title: 'The Karnataka election was not a vote of trust in the Congress party'
subtitle: 'If the winning party fails to govern well, clean up their image and showcase internal solidarity, they will be handing the next election to the BJP on a silver platter.'
cover_position: start
author: b5b32860-ebab-42d8-95fe-bff6933f0df6
recommended: false
updated_by: b5b32860-ebab-42d8-95fe-bff6933f0df6
updated_at: 1684982231
images: images/the-congress-flag-credit-pti-file-photo-1194014-1677152772.jpg
tags:
  - politics
  - india
credit: 'Press Trust of India'
---
When the Congress party was [voted to power earlier this week](https://www.thehindu.com/elections/karnataka-assembly/congress-surge-topples-bjp-in-karnataka/article66847235.ece) with their largest majority since 1989, it was touted by many as a historic win. But it was historic only for the party, not for the state of Karnataka which is intimately familiar with the anti-incumbent vote. For Karnataka it was just another case of voting for whoever is not in power, with their choices being the Congress and the JD(S).

The results of this election, seen by many as the spiritual forerunner to the national elections next year, were decidedly important. They prompted even the BJP's ennervated mascot Mr Narendra Modi—who also serves as the Prime Minister of India—to participate in six road shows during 19 public rallies across the length and breadth of the state. It was all for nought. The BJP lost 38 seats and the Congress gained 55 compared to the last election; but these results were more representative of people's thirst for change than their trust in the Congress. The Congress party would do well to realise that they do not have the people's trust, merely their benevolence in the form of a generous opportunity to prove their worth. The power is now in the hands of the Congress and it is theirs to lose.

## Corruption and regional identity

Seen objectively this election was mundane. History has taught us that populist parties fall almost always because of bad governance. Their shroud of progression and fervour of nationalism can only conceal questionable governance for so long. This was the [case with the BJP](https://frontline.thehindu.com/politics/bjp-rule-in-karnataka-marked-by-caste-corruption-and-communalism/article65956234.ece), with far too many people caught receiving awkwardly [large sums of cash](https://indianexpress.com/article/explained/explained-politics/bjp-mla-son-bribery-scandal-history-powers-of-the-karnataka-lokayukta-8479567/) or found engaging in other forms of corruption to the point where even [schools, religious institutions and molasses](https://www.indiatoday.in/india/story/karnataka-basavaraj-bommai-corruption-charges-congress-elections-2342292-2023-03-03) were not left untouched.

In addition to all this, while the BJP seems to have figured out how to exploit hindutva to grab power across the Hindi belt up north, they are taking painfully long to understand the regional pride and identities across South Indian states. Such a habit of viewing people as a hive mind is also a characteristic of populist governments except in this case trying to bring in those same ideas that were triumphant for the party in the north backfired. All the BJP needs to do is recognise the autonomous identities of the peoples of Karnataka and they will prevent votes of disgust cast against them. Examples of this include the overuse of ‘ji’ as a form of virtue-signalling one’s respect when the local ‘avaré’ would do just fine, or trying to vigorously force Hindi into daily life with little regard to Kannada, Tulu and their many dialects spoken across the state.

The BJP in Karnataka has not always mirrored the extreme values of their counterparts up north; at least not until Mr Yeddyurappa’s government gave way to Mr Bommai after the party’s most recent power grab. This actually kept the party grounded and kept the people open to considering them during an election. If the BJP continues to toe Mr Modi’s line of hardline hindu nationalism, the party risks getting sidelined in Karnataka. The real question then is what politician is capable of leading the BJP in the state this month onwards without bowing to the whims of the party’s discountenanced leadership. There are almost none but if Mr Bommai is to be believed he should step up and do it himself—after all he did say the BJP is [not a dictatorship](https://www.dtnext.in/national/2023/04/11/bjp-is-democratic-party-not-a-dictatorship-like-congress-bommai).

## A congressional opportunity

The Indian National Congress lately is no stranger to shooting itself in the foot.[Their own leaders do it](https://www.ndtv.com/india-news/siddaramaiahs-lingayat-remark-on-b-bommai-then-a-hasty-clarification-3972071) with alarming frequency. But the opportunity they have been given with this huge mandate is not one they should take lightly. To start, they would do well to keep in mind that the BJP is by nature a reactionist party: they wait like hawks on the sidelines to call out with reliable vulgarity every time their opposition party missteps. Some might see this as a responsible opposition party, but no case can be made for the party’s signature indecency which, in the past, has included name-calling, fishing with court cases, random ED arrests and unprompted IT raids.

All this means that the Congress must, above everything, display composure. They have made their promises and the time will come to keep them but one day one composure is critical. Throughout the election the party was hounded in vain about their lack of a chief ministerial face. The BJP tried specifically to create a rift between the Congress’s state leader Mr D.K. Shivakumar and their candidate-of-choice on previous occassions, the shrewd Mr Siddaramaiah. The two gentlemen did a remarkable job of showing unity in the lead up to the election. But it is more important that they continue to do so after their win. Before the election it may be argued that the duo were incentivised by the promise of power so they had a lot for which they could paint a unified face—including a clearly staged conversation between the two involving well-planned small talk. Now that they have won the election, can they still look out for each other? If they do not, the BJP will come calling.

Second, the party should do everything it can to showcase a sense of autonomy from their power centre in Delhi. Few believe that despite all the show of electing a party president whose name does not end in ‘Gandhi’, the Gandhis have actually relinquished any power at all. If the Chief Minister is not decided at the state level, the party risks adding fuel to the BJP’s fire of the Congress being remotely control from Delhi. Should any of this materialise—as it most likely will—the Congress is at a disadvantage because they have failed to deliver sharp responses to the BJP in the past.

Third, they should start working on realising the promises made in their 150–page manifesto *and they should publicise it every time they achieve something*. What set the BJP apart from the Congress was their loud mouth. They never hesitated to tout their own horn when it came to whatever remarkably little they had done to the point where it gave people the impression of progress. In terms of the manifesto, the Congress and the BJP both had it easy. After all the AAP promised both [‘jobs for all’ as well as ‘unemployment allowance’](https://i.redd.it/mrutybue7sla1.jpg) at the same time. A large part of the BJP manifesto was their usual promises except with local names attached to them, like mass surveillance in Bangalore in the name of women’s safety. In Delhi, [the most surveilled city outside China](https://wagingnonviolence.org/2022/10/rise-of-indias-dystopian-surveillance-state/), the party had [raised the same issue](https://indianexpress.com/article/india/india-news-india/cctv-row-aap-least-bothered-about-protecting-delhi-bjp-2961876/) in Delhi too. The inability to publicise their work has been the Congress’ weakness and strong PRO will be key to ensuring the state knows of their policies, stances and work.

Fourth, the Congress should continue to resist the BJP’s baiting remarks. During their election campaign, the Congress squarely targetted the BJP on its governance and resisted gracing the BJP’s remarks on Hindu vigilantism, caste etc. with a response. Congress’s spokespersons kept mum at all levels in the party across the state, which ultimately bode well for them. The real issue now is whether they can keep that discipline up *after* having won the election.

## A strange familiarity with self-sabotage

The Congress party is intimately familiar with shooting themselves in the foot. There is little to indicate they will not do that again. The widely televised and rather overly dramatic cameraderie between its two state-level leaders—the former Chief Minister Mr Siddaramaiah and the party’s current state-level president Mr D.K. Shivakumar—could barely stand as the primary question that propped up soon after the party won the vote was which of the two would become the next Chief Minister. Rather than resolve it mutually or at least at the state level, the party rushed to Delhi seeking intervention from the party’s command in the centre. This is simply more ammunition for the BJP which in the past has made a big affair out of every trip Congress workers made to Delhi. Opportunities for criticism like this can be the Congress’s undoing in the long run.