---
id: 44571a0d-168d-48b1-b456-360a92fbffb8
published: false
blueprint: essay
title: 'The 70-hour work week is a travesty of productivity'
subtitle: 'The juvenile idea that working long hours translate to greater productivity stems from rich people’s disconnect with reality'
cover_position: center
author: b5b32860-ebab-42d8-95fe-bff6933f0df6
recommended: true
updated_by: b5b32860-ebab-42d8-95fe-bff6933f0df6
updated_at: 1700520039
images: images/overwork.jpg
credit: '<a href="https://unsplash.com/photos/a-person-sitting-at-a-desk-in-a-room-filled-with-desks-ToxUgLe7tpE">Igor Omilaev</a>'
tags:
  - society
  - lifestyle
---
It is well known that wealth reduces compassion. Paul Piff and Dacher Keltner, two psychologists at Berkeley, have [published seven studies](https://www.pnas.org/doi/abs/10.1073/pnas.1118373109) showing that higher social class-as marked by wealth and occupational prestige—is a reliable predictor of “unethical behaviour”. Specifically, such people are more likely to “take valued goods from others” and “lie in a negotiation” and “endorse unethical behaviour at work”.

In an [interview about ten days ago](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ES8ZNSTswrs) Mr Narayan Murthy—one of the founders of _Infosys_, the Indian company known as one of the largest destinations for the world’s outsourced tech jobs—[said about modern-day work hours](https://www.thelondoneconomic.com/business-economics/sunaks-billionaire-father-in-law-is-calling-for-a-70-hour-working-week-362242/) in India:

> India’s work productivity is one of the lowest in the world ... Unless we improve our work productivity ... we will not be able to compete with those countries that have made tremendous progress ...  So, therefore, my request is that our youngsters must say, “This is my country. I’d like to work 70 hours a week.”
> 
> <cite>Mr Narayan Murthy _in conversation with Mr Mohandas Pai_</cite>

This is the origin of the debate currently raging in India about the unimportance of work–life balance. This notion has been branded a ‘western’ one, suitable only for ‘developed’ countries. Its proponents, besides My Murthy, include Bhavish Agarwal, the founder of Ola; Sajjan Jindal, the chairman of JSW Group; Rajagopal Menon, founder of the cryptocurrency exchange WazirX; and Anupam Mittal, the founder of the matrimonial website _Shaadi.com_ who gained further fame as a judge on India’s edition of Shark Tank[^1].

Some others, in all fairness, have been unsure of this. Elsewhere, albeit not in reponse to this interview but much earlier in time, Elon Musk, the billionaire toying around with X (formerly Twitter) and Alibaba’s Jack Ma have both spoken in favour of working 70 hours a week or more.

# The primitive roots in battle scars

Many people whose work confines the to a desk find themselves losing perspective on the amount of work they have done. The only short-term quantifiable measure of their work[^2] seems to be the time they spent at their desk. Compare this with someone working in an Amazon warehouse; the quantifiers are plenty in more physically-intensive jobs including boxes moved, deliveries completed etc.

The psychologist Christina Maslach has one of my favourite explanations for this: “guys had duels and they'd have a dueling scar, which is almost a kind of badge of honour. You fought and you survived. That's where you brag about, ‘Yeah, I don't sleep’. It's that kind of thing."

When the only immediately quantifiable measure of your work is the time you spent (supposedly) working, you attempt to maximise that, possibly to the point of hyperbole.

These statements are being fired mostly by entrepreneurs and senior management—people who would consider themselves as ‘successful’ by society’s standards. It is not unlikely that this comes from a desire to recognise their success as the fruit of their labour. _Outliers_, the wonderful book by Malcolm Gladwell, has shown us that success is often the result numerous factors coming together. Hard work is only one of these factors and the only one truly in our control; but success relies on opportunity which itself depends greatly on chance. Effort might prepare us better to respond to chances but neither will offer us success by themselves. These 70-hour statements by the likes of Mr Murthy is an attempt at seeking recognition for their successes as the result of their hard work while downplaying the role that chance would nevertheless have played in their successes.

[^1]: A smattering of sources have reported the stances taken by these gentlemen. See this [report by Business Standard](https://www.business-standard.com/industry/news/india-inc-divided-on-narayana-murthy-s-call-for-70-hour-work-week-to-youth-123102700941_1.html) and [this one by Indian Express](https://indianexpress.com/article/entertainment/television/shark-tank-india-namita-thapar-narayan-murthy-working-70-hours-a-week-statement-family-time-mental-health-9008767/) for statements by all the names listed.

[^2]: It is important to clarify here that for less physically intensive jobs there are other quantifiers but they are long-term in nature. What I refer to are short-term quantifiers. Quarterly business growth or annual sales targets, for example, are not short-term evidence of the work you put in day after day like the time you spent behind your desk is.