---
id: 01afc771-a883-4a7e-ba8e-07d4089629cc
published: false
blueprint: essay
title: 'The Future of Work in the Age of Automation'
cover_position: center
author: b5b32860-ebab-42d8-95fe-bff6933f0df6
recommended: true
updated_by: b5b32860-ebab-42d8-95fe-bff6933f0df6
updated_at: 1688740363
subtitle: 'The topic for this essay was suggested by ChatGPT.'
tags:
  - society
  - technology
images: images/age-of-ai.png
---
> The Future of Work in the Age of Automation: Will advancements in artificial intelligence and automation lead to mass unemployment or a new era of productivity and innovation?
The Pros and Cons of Universal Basic Income: Would providing all citizens with a guaranteed basic income be a solution to poverty and inequality, or would it discourage people from working and stifle economic growth?
The Ethics of AI: As artificial intelligence becomes more advanced, how can we ensure that it is developed and used ethically, and what are the potential risks of unchecked AI development?

## Research

- The presence of AI is not always noticeable; Chat GPT is an example of recpgnisable, intentional use of AI but AI itself is used more often without people realising it as in streaming services (for recommendations, potentially affecting your choices and tastes in the long run), in e-commerce like Amazon (for consumer behaviour prediction, purchase suggestions, even to influence your financial decisions by strategically prompting you to use BNPL solutions), in ride sharing apps like Uber for driver–rider matching, fraud detection, risk assessment etc.
- [UNESCO calls for two points](https://www.unesco.org/en/artificial-intelligence/recommendation-ethics) to be kept in mind when developing AI:
   - International and national policies and regulatory frameworks to ensure that these emerging technologies benefit humanity as a whole.
   - A human-centred AI. AI must be for the greater interest of the people, not the other way around.
- Ethics is a branch of moral philosophy that involves systematising, proving and recommending what is right and wrong behaviour.
- Laying some ground rules for AI ethics is important because AI learns from large data models sourced from humans and carrying their biases which could train AI and cause it to amplify these biases greatly.
- Quote from IBM on [the need for AI ethics](https://www.ibm.com/in-en/topics/ai-ethics):
 > Ethics is a set of moral principles which help us discern between right and wrong. AI ethics is a set of guidelines that advise on the design and outcomes of artificial intelligence. Human beings come with all sorts of cognitive biases, such as recency and confirmation bias, and those inherent biases are exhibited in our behaviors and subsequently, our data. Since data is the foundation for all machine learning algorithms, it’s important for us to structure experiments and algorithms with this in mind as artificial intelligence has the potential to amplify and scale these human biases at an unprecedented rate.